Visual Room Rearrangement
Luca Weihs1 Matt Deitke1,2 Aniruddha Kembhavi1,2 Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2
1PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI 2University of Washington
ai2thor.allenai.org/rearrangement
Figure 1: An instance of the Room Rearrangement task. Objects begin in the positions indicated by the solid 3D bounding
boxes. An agent must walk through the room and record the objects it sees. The agent is then removed, and objects are moved
to the locations indicated by the dashed bounding boxes. The agent is then reintroduced into the room and must interact with
objects (moving or opening them) to return the room to its original state.
Abstract
There has been a signiﬁcant recent progress in the ﬁeld
of Embodied AI with researchers developing models and
algorithms enabling embodied agents to navigate and in-
teract within completely unseen environments. In this pa-
per , we propose a new dataset and baseline models for the
task of Rearrangement. We particularly focus on the task
of Room Rearrangement: an agent begins by exploring a
room and recording objects’ initial conﬁgurations. We then
remove the agent and change the poses and states (e.g.,
open/closed) of some objects in the room. The agent must
restore the initial conﬁgurations of all objects in the room.
Our dataset, named RoomR, includes 6,000 distinct rear-
rangement settings involving 72 different object types in 120
scenes. Our experiments show that solving this challenging
interactive task that involves navigation and object interac-
tion is beyond the capabilities of the current state-of-the-art
techniques for embodied tasks and we are still very far from
achieving perfect performance on these types of tasks.
1. Introduction
One of the longstanding goals of Embodied AI is to build
agents that interact with their surrounding world and per-
form tasks. Recently, navigation and instruction following
tasks have gained popularity [ 1, 2, 4] in the Embodied AI
community. These tasks are the building blocks of inter-
active embodied agents, and over the past few years, we
have observed remarkable progress regarding the develop-
ment of models and algorithms. However, a typical assump-
tion for these tasks is that the environment is static; namely,
the agent can move within the environment but cannot inter-
act with objects or modify their state. The ability to interact
with and change its environment is crucial for any artiﬁ-
cial embodied agent and cannot be studied in static envi-
ronments. There is a general trend towards interactive tasks
[50, 41, 49]. These tasks focus on speciﬁc aspects of in-
teraction such as object manipulation, long-horizon plan-
ning and understanding pre-condition and post-conditions
of actions. In this paper, we address a more comprehensive
task in a visually rich environment that can subsume each
of these skills.
5922

We address an instantiation of the rearrangement prob-
lem, an interactive task, recently introduced by Batra et
al. [ 3]. The goal of the rearrangement task is to reach a
goal room conﬁguration from an initial room conﬁguration
through interaction. In our instantiation, an agent must re-
cover a scene conﬁguration after we have randomly moved,
or changed the state of, several objects ( e.g. see Fig. 1).
This problem has two stages: walkthrough and unshuf-
ﬂe . During the walkthrough stage, the agent may explore
the scene and, through egocentric perception, record infor-
mation regarding the goal conﬁguration. We then remove
the agent from the room and move some objects to other
locations or change their state ( e.g. opening a closed mi-
crowave). In the unshufﬂe stage, the agent must interact
with objects in the room to recover the goal conﬁguration
observed in the walkthrough stage.
Rearrangement poses several challenges such as infer-
ring the visual differences between the initial and goal con-
ﬁgurations, inferring the objects’ state, learning the post-
conditions and pre-conditions of actions, maintaining a
persistent and compact memory representation during the
walkthrough stage, and successful navigation. To establish
baseline performance for our task, we evaluate an actor-
critic model akin to the state-of-the-art models used for
long-horizon tasks such as navigation. We train our base-
lines using decentralized distributed proximal policy op-
timization (DD-PPO) [ 47, 40], a reward-based RL algo-
rithm, as well as with DAgger [ 37], a behavioral cloning
method. During the walkthrough stage, the agent uses a
non-parametric mapping module to memorize its observa-
tions along with any visible objects and their positions. In
the unshufﬂe stage the agent compares images that it ob-
serves against what it has observed in its map and may use
this information to inform which objects it should move
or open. As a proof-of-concept we also run experiments
with a model that includes a semantic mapping component
adapted from the Active Neural SLAM model [ 8].
To facilitate research in this challenging direction,
we compiled the Room Rearrangement (RoomR) dataset.
RoomR is built upon AI2-THOR [ 29], a virtual interac-
tive environment that enables interacting with objects and
changing their state. The RoomR dataset includes 6,000 re-
arrangement tasks that involve changing the pose and state
of multiple objects within an episode. The level of the dif-
ﬁculty of each episode varies depending on the differences
between the initial and the goal object conﬁgurations. We
have used 120 rooms and more than 70 unique object cate-
gories to create the dataset.
We consider two variations of the room rearrangement
task. In the ﬁrst setting, which we call the 1-Phase task,
the agent completes the walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages
in parallel so that it is given aligned images from the walk-
through and unshufﬂe conﬁgurations at every step. In the
second setting, the 2-Phase task, the agent must complete
the walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages sequentially; this 2-
Phase variant is more challenging as it requires the agent to
reason over longer time spans. Highlighting the difﬁculty
of the rearrangement, our evaluations show that our strong
baselines struggle even in the easier 1-Phase task. Rear-
rangement poses a new set of challenges for the embodied-
AI community. Our code and dataset are publicly available.
A supplementary video1 provides the description of the task
and some qualitative results.
2. Related Work
Embodied AI tasks. In recent years, we have witnessed a
surge of interest in learning-based Embodied AI tasks. V ar-
ious tasks have been proposed in this domain: navigation
towards objects [ 4, 51, 48, 7] or towards a speciﬁc point
[1, 38, 47, 36], scene exploration [ 9, 8], embodied question
answering [ 18, 13], task completion [ 55], instruction fol-
lowing [ 2, 41], object manipulation [ 16, 52], multi-agent
coordination [ 24, 23], and many others. Rearrangement
can be considered as a broader task that encompasses skills
learned through these tasks.
Rearrangement. Rearrangement Planning is an estab-
lished ﬁeld in robotics research where the goal is to reach
a goal state from an initial state [ 5, 44, 27, 31, 53, 33].
While these methods have shown impressive performance,
they consider complete observability of the state from per-
fect visual perception [ 11, 27], a planar surface as the envi-
ronment [30, 42], a static robot [ 15, 32], same environment
for evaluation of generalization [ 39, 26], or a limited set of
object categories or limited variation within the categories
[10, 19]. Some works address some of these issues, such
as generalization to new objects or imperfect perception
[54, 6]. In this paper, we take a step further and relax these
assumptions by considering raw visual input instead of per-
fect perception, a visually and geometrically complex scene
as the conﬁguration space, separate scenes for training and
evaluation, a variety of objects, and object state changes.
Task and motion planning. Our work can be considered
as an instance of joint task and motion planning [ 25, 43,
35, 17, 12] since solving the rearrangement task requires
low-level motion planning to plan a sequence of actions and
high-level task planning to recover the goal state from the
initial state of the scene. However, the focus of these works
is primarily on the planning problem rather than perception.
3. The Room Rearrangement Task
3.1. Deﬁnition
Our goal is to rearrange an initial conﬁguration of a room
into a goal conﬁguration. So that our agent does not have to
1https://youtu.be/1APxaOC9U-A
5923

reason about soft-body physics, we restrict our attention to
piece-wise rigid objects. Suppose a room contains n piece-
wise rigid objects. We deﬁne the state for object i as si =
(pi,o i,c i,b i) where
• pi 2 {3D rotations and translations } = SE(3) records
the pose of the object,
• if the object can be opened oi 2 [0, 1] speciﬁes the
openness of an object ( e.g. oi =0 .5 means a door is
half open) and if the object cannot be opened ( e.g.a
mug) then oi = ;,
• ci records the 8 coordinates in R3 of the corners of the
3D bounding box for object i, and
• bi 2 {0, 1} records if the ith object is “broken” (1 if
broken, otherwise 0).
While this deﬁnition of an object’s state is constrained ( e.g.
objects can be more than just “broken” and “unbroken”) it
matches well the capabilities of our target embodied envi-
ronment (AI2-THOR) and can be easily enriched as embod-
ied environments become increasingly realistic. We now let
S = SE(3) ⇥ ([0, 1] [ {;}) ⇥ R8·3 ⇥ {0, 1} be the set of
all possible poses for a single object and S = Qn
i=1 S the
set of all possible joint object poses. The agent’s goal is to
convert an initial conﬁguration s0 2 S to a goal s⇤ 2 S.
Our task has two stages: (1) walkthrough and (2) unshuf-
ﬂe . During the walkthrough stage, the agent is placed into a
room with goal state s⇤, and it should collect as much infor-
mation as needed for that particular state of the room in a
maximum number of actions (for us, 250). The agent is re-
moved from the room after the walkthrough stage. We then
select a random subset of the n objects and change their
state. The state change may be a change in p or o. This
state will be the initial state s0 that the agent observes at
the beginning of the unshufﬂe stage. The agent’s goal is to
convert s0 to s⇤ (s0 ! s⇤) via a sequence of actions.
3.2. Metrics
To quantify an agent’s performance, we introduce four
metrics below. Recall from the above that an agent begins
an unshufﬂe episode with the room in state s0 and has the
goal of rearranging the room to end in state s⇤. Suppose that
at the end of an unshufﬂe episode, the agent has reconﬁg-
ured the room so that it lies in state s =( s1,...,s n) 2 S.
In practice, we cannot expect that the agent will place ob-
jects in exactly the same positions as in s⇤. We instead
choose a collection of thresholds which determine if two
object poses are, approximately, equal. When two poses
(si,s ⇤
i ) are approximately equal we write si ⇡ s⇤
i . Other-
wise we write si 6⇡ s⇤
i .
Let s1
i ,s 2
i 2 S be two possible poses for object i. As it
makes little intuitive sense to compare the poses of broken
objects, we will always assert that poses of broken objects
are unequal. Thus if b1
i =1 or b2
i =1 we deﬁne s1
i 6⇡ s2.
Now let’s assume that neither b1
i =1 nor b2
i =1 . If ob-
ject i is pickupable, let IOU (s1
i ,s 2
i ) be the intersection over
union between the 3D bounding boxes c1
i ,c 2
i . We then say
that s1
i ⇡ s2
i if, and only if, IOU (s1
i ,s 2
i )   0.5. If object
i is openable but not pickupable, we say that s1
i ⇡ s2 if,
and only if, |o1
i   o2
i |  0.2. The use of the IOU above
means that object poses can be approximately equal even
when their orientations are completely different. While this
can be easily made more stringent, our rearrangement task
is already quite challenging. Note also that our below met-
rics do not consider the case where there are multiple identi-
cal objects in a scene (as this does not occur in our dataset).
We now describe our metrics.
Success (SUCCESS ) – This is the most unforgiving of our
metrics and equals 1 if all object poses in s and s⇤ are ap-
proximately equal, otherwise it equals 0.
% Fixed (Strict) (%F IXED STRICT ) – The above S UCCESS
metric does not give any credit to an agent if it manages to
rearrange some, but not all, objects within a room. To this
end, let Mstart = {i | s0
i 6⇡ s⇤
i } be the set of misplaced
objects at the start of the unshufﬂe stage and let Mend =
{i | si 6⇡ s⇤
i } be the set of misplaced objects at the end of
the episode. We then let %F IXED STRICT equal 0 if |Mend \
Mstart| > 0 (i.e. the agent has moved an object that should
not have been moved) and, otherwise, let %F IXED STRICT
equal 1   |Mend|/|Mstart| (i.e. the proportion of objects that
were misplaced initially but ended in the correct pose).
% Energy Remaining (%E) – Missing from all of the
above metrics is the ability to give partial credit if, for ex-
ample, the agent moves an object across a room and to-
wards the goal pose, but fails to place it so that it has a
sufﬁciently high IOU with the goal. To allow for partial
credit, we deﬁne an energy function D : S ⇥ S ! [0, 1]
that monotonically decreases to 0 as two poses get closer
together (see the Appendix E for full details) and which
equals zero if two poses are approximately equal. The
%E metric is then deﬁned as the amount of energy re-
maining at the end of the unshufﬂe episode divided by
the total energy at the start of the unshufﬂe episode, e.g.
%E =( Pn
i=1 D(si,s ⇤
i ))/(Pn
i=1 D(s0
i ,s ⇤
i )).
# Changed (#C HANGED ) – To give additional insight as to
our agent’s behavior we also include the #C HANGED met-
ric. This metric is simply the the number of objects whose
pose has been changed by the agent during the unshufﬂe
stage. Note that larger or smaller values of this metric are
not necessarily “better” (both moving no objects and mov-
ing many objects randomly are poor strategies).
The above metrics are then averaged across episodes
when reporting results.
4. The RoomR Dataset
The Room Rearrangement (RoomR) dataset utilizes 120
rooms in AI2-THOR [ 29] and contains 6,000 unique rear-
rangements (50 rearrangements per training, validation, and
5924

Object Distance Moved
VerƟcal
Horizontal
0m 2m 4m 6m 8m 10m
Figure 2: Distance distribution. The horizontal (Man-
hattan distance) and vertical distance distributions between
changed objects in their goal and initial positions.
testing room). Each datapoint consists of an initial room
state s0, the agent’s starting position, and the goal state s⇤.
4.1. Generating Rearrangements
The automatic generation of the dataset enables us to scale
up the number of rearrangements easily. We generate each
room rearrangement using the procedure that follows.
Place agent. We randomize the agent’s position on the
ﬂoor. The position is restricted to lie on a grid, where
each cell is of size 0.25m ⇥ 0.25m. The agent’s rotation is
then randomly chosen amongst {0 , 90 , 180 , 270 }. The
agent’s starting pose is the same for both s0 and s⇤.
Shufﬂe background objects. To obtain different conﬁgu-
rations of objects for each task in the dataset, we randomly
shufﬂe each movable object, ensuring background objects
do not always appear in the same position. Shufﬂed objects
are never hidden inside other receptacles ( e.g. fridges, cab-
inets), which reduces the task’s complexity.
Sample objects. We now randomly sample a set of N   0
openable but non-pickupable objects and a set of M   0
pickupable objects. These objects and counts are chosen
randomly with N 2 {0, 1} and M 2 {1   N, ..., 5   N }.
Goal ( s⇤) setup. We open the N objects sampled in the
last step to some randomly chosen degree of openness in
[0, 1] and move the other M pickupable objects to arbitrary
locations within the room. The room’s current state is now
s⇤, the start state for the walkthrough stage.
Initial (s0) setup. We randomize the N sampled openable
objects’ openness and shufﬂe the position of each of the M
sampled pickupable objects once more. We are now in s0,
the start state for the unshufﬂe stage.
In the above process, we ensure that no broken objects are
in s0 or s⇤. While we provide a ﬁxed number of datapoints
per room, this process can be used to sample a practically
unbounded number of rearrangements.
4.2. Dataset Properties
Rooms. There are 120 rooms across the categories of
kitchen, living room, bathroom, and bedroom (30 rooms
for each category). We designate 20 rooms for training, 5
rooms for validation, and 5 rooms for testing, across each
room category. Of the 6 ,000 unique rearrangements in our
dataset, 4000 are designated for training, 1000 are set in
Kitchens Living Rooms
0.0m
0.4m
0.6m
0.8m
1.0m
1.2m
1.4m
0.2m
Bedrooms Bathrooms
Object Volume
Figure 3: Distribution of object size. Each column con-
tains the cube root of every object’s bounding box volume
that may change in openness (red) or position (blue) for a
particular room. Notice that, across room categories, ob-
jects that change in position are signiﬁcantly smaller than
objects that change in openness.
validation rooms, and 1000 are set in test rooms. For each
such split, there are 50 rearrangements per room.
Objects. There are 118 object categories (listed in Ap-
pendix F), among which 62 are pickupable ( e.g. cup) and
10 are openable and non-pickupable ( e.g. fridge). The set
of object categories that appear in the validation and testing
rooms is a subset of the object categories that appear during
training. Thus, if a plant appears in a validation or test-
ing room, then a plant is also present in one of the training
rooms. While all object categories are seen during training,
the physical appearance of object instances are often unique
in training, validation, and testing rooms. AI2-THOR pro-
vides annotation as to if an object is pickupable, openable,
movable, or static.
Across the dataset, there are 1895 pickupable object in-
stances and 1262 openable non-pickupable object instances
(an average of 15.7 and 10.5, respectively, per room). Fig. 2
shows the distance distribution (horizontal and vertical) of
objects between their initial and goal positions. It illustrates
the complexity of the problem, where the agent must travel
relatively far to recover the goal conﬁguration. Fig. 3 shows
the distribution of these object groups and their sizes within
every room. Note that pickupable objects ( e.g. apple, fork)
tend to be relatively small and hard to ﬁnd, compared to
openable non-pickupable objects ( e.g. cabinets, drawers).
Further, across room categories, the number of openable
non-pickupable objects varies considerably.
5. Model
In our experiments, Sec. 6, we consider two RoomR task
variants: 1-Phase and 2-Phase. In the 1-Phase task, the
agent completes the unshufﬂe and walkthrough stages si-
5925

Metric
Map
ResNetRGB
Embedding
 LSTM
aƩenƟŽŶ
GRU
ResNet
KƵƚƉƵƚƚŽ
ŐĞŶƚWŽƐĞ
Figure 4: Model overview. The model is used for both the unshufﬂe and walkthrough stages. The connections speciﬁc to
the walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages are shown in blue and red, respectively. The dashed lines represent connections from
the previous time step. The model’s trainable parameters, inputs and outputs, and intermediate features are shown in yellow,
pink, and blue, respectively.
multaneously in lock step. The model we employ for this
1-Phase task is a simpliﬁcation of the model used when
performing the 2-Phase task (in which both stages must be
completed sequentially and so longer-term memory is re-
quired). For space we only describe the 2-Phase model be-
low, see our codebase for all architectural details.
Our network architecture, see Fig. 4, follows the same
basic structure as is commonly employed within Embod-
ied AI tasks [ 38, 47, 14, 45, 23]: a combination of a con-
volutional neural network to process input egocentric im-
ages, a collection of embedding layers to encode discrete
inputs, and an RNN to enable the agent to reason through
time. In addition to this baseline architecture, we would
like our agent to have two capabilities relevant to the rear-
rangement task, namely the abilities to, during the unshufﬂe
stage, (a) explicitly compare images seen during the walk-
through stage against those seen during the unshufﬂe stage,
and (b) reference an implicit representation of the walk-
through stage. We now describe the details of our archi-
tecture and how we enable these additional capabilities.
Our agents are of the actor-critic [ 34] variety and thus, at
each timestep t   0, given observations ω t (e.g. an egocen-
tric RGB image) and a summary ht 1 of the agent’s history,
we require that an agent produces a policy π θ (ω t | ht 1)
(i.e. a distribution over the agent’s actions) and a value
vθ (ω t | ht 1) (i.e. an estimate of future rewards). Here
we let θ 2 Θ be a catch-all parameter representing all of
the trainable parameters in our network. As we wish for
our agent to have characteristically different behavior in the
walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages, we have two separate
policies π walk
θ and π unsh.
θ (and similarly for vθ ).
To encode input 224 ⇥224⇥3 RGB egocentric images,
we use a ResNet18 [ 21] model (pretrained on ImageNet)
with frozen model weights with the ﬁnal average pooling
and classiﬁcation layers removed. This ResNet18 model
transforms input images into 7⇥7⇥512 tensors. For our
RNN, we leverage a 1-layer LSTM [ 22] with 512 hidden
units. To produce the policies π walk and π unsh. we use two
512 ⇥ 84 linear layers, each applied to the output from the
LSTM, and each followed by a softmax nonlinearity. Simi-
larly, to produce the two values vwalk and vunsh. we use two
distinct 512 ⇥ 1 linear layers applied to the output of the
LSTM with no additional nonlinearity. We now describe
how we enable agents the abilities (a) and (b) above.
Mapping and image comparison. Our model includes a
non-parametric mapping module. The module saves the
RGB images seen by the agent during the walkthrough
stage, along with the agent’s pose. During the unshufﬂe
stage, the agent (i) queries the metric map for all poses
visited during the walkthrough stage, (ii) chooses the pose
closest to the agent’s current pose, and then (iii) retrieves
the image saved by the walkthrough agent at that pose. Us-
ing an attention mechanism, the agent can then compare
this retrieved image against its current observation to decide
which objects to target.
Implicit representations of the walkthrough stage. In
addition to explicitly storing the images seen during the
walkthrough stage, we also wish to enable our agent to pro-
duce an implicit representation of its experiences during the
walkthrough stage. To this end, at every timestep t during
the walkthrough stage we pass ht, the output of the 1-layer
LSTM described above, to a 1-layer GRU with 512 hid-
den units to produce the walkthrough encoding wt. During
the unshufﬂe stage this walkthrough encoding is no longer
updated and is simply taken as the encoding from the last
walkthrough step. The walkthrough encoding is passed as
5926

an input to the LSTM in a recurrent fashion.
6. Experiments
This section provides the results for several baseline ap-
proaches that achieve state-of-the-art performance on other
embodied tasks ( e.g. navigation). The room rearrangement
task and the RoomR dataset are very challenging. To make
the problem more manageable, we simplify assumptions in
choosing the action space and the sensor modalities. Sec.
6.1 and Sec. 6.2 explain the details of the action space
and sensor modalities, respectively. We show that even with
these simpliﬁcations, the baseline models struggle.
6.1. Action Space
AI2-THOR offers a wide variety of means by which
agents may interact with their environment ranging from
“low-level” ( e.g. applying forces to individual objects) to
“high-level” ( e.g. open an object of the given type) inter-
actions. Prior work, e.g.[ 24, 45, 23, 18, 41] has primarily
used higher-level actions to abstract away some details that
would otherwise distract from the problem of interest. We
follow this prior work and deﬁne our agent’s action space as
A = ANav. [ ARotate [ ALook [ AUpDown [ APickup [ AOpen [
{PLACE OBJECT , DONE } where taking action:
• a 2 ANav. = {MOVE X | X 2 {AHEAD ,L EFT ,R IGHT ,
BACK}} results in the agent moving 0.25m in the direc-
tion speciﬁed by X in the agent’s coordinate frame (unless
this would result in the agent colliding with an object).
• a 2 ARotate = {ROTATELEFT , ROTATERIGHT } results in
the agent rotating 90   clockwise if a = ROTATERIGHT
and 90  counter-clockwise if a = ROTATELEFT .
• a 2 ALook = {LOOK UP, LOOK DOWN} results in the
agent lowering/raising its camera angle by 30  ,
• a 2 APickup = {PICKUP X | X 2 {the 62 pickupable
object types }} results in the agent picking up a visible
object of type X if: (a) the agent is not already holding an
object, (b) the agent is close enough to the object (within
1.5m), and (c) picking up the object would not result in
it colliding with objects in front of the agent. If there are
multiple objects of type X then the closest is chosen.
• a 2 AUpDown = {STAND, CROUCH } results in the agent
raising or lowering the agent’s camera to one of two ﬁxed
heights allowing it to, e.g., see objects under tables.
• a 2 AOpen = {OPEN X | X 2 {the 10 openable object
types that are not pickupable }}, if an object whose open-
ness is different from the openness in the goal state is vis-
ible and within 1.5m of the agent, this object’s openness
is changed to its value in the goal state.
• a = PLACE OBJECT results in the agent dropping its held
object. If the held object’s goal state is visible and within
1.5m of the agent, it is placed into that goal state. Oth-
erwise, a heuristic is used to place the object on a nearby
surface.
• a = DONE results in the walkthrough or unshufﬂe stage
immediately terminating.
In total, there are |A| = 84 possible actions. Some of the
above actions have been designed to be fairly abstract or
“high-level,” e.g. the P LACE OBJECT action abstracts away
all object manipulation complexities. As we discuss in Ap-
pendix C, we have implemented “lower-level” actions. Still,
we stress that, even with these more abstract actions, the
planning and visual reasoning required in RoomR already
makes the task very challenging.
6.2. RoomR Variants
We will now detail the 1-Phase and, more difﬁcult, 2-
Phase variants of our RoomR task. These variants are, in
part, deﬁned by the sensors available to the agent. We begin
by listing all sensors (note that only a subset of these will
be available to any given agent in the below variants):
• RGB – An egocentric 224 ⇥224⇥3 RGB image corre-
sponding to the agent’s current viewpoint (90   FOV). In the
1-Phase task this corresponds to the RGB image from the
unshufﬂe stage.
• WALKTHROUGH RGB – This sensor is only available in
the 1-Phase task and is identical to RGB except it shows
the egocentric image as though the agent was in the Walk-
through stage, i.e. all objects were in their goal positions.
It is this sensor that makes it possible, during the 1-Phase
task, for the agent to perform pixel-to-pixel comparisons
between the environment as it should be in the walkthrough
stage and as it is during the unshufﬂe stage.
• AGENT POSITION – The agent’s position relative to its
starting location (this is equivalent to the assumption of per-
fect egomotion estimation).
• INWALKTHROUGH – Only relevant during the 2-Phase
task, this sensor returns “true” if the agent is currently in
the walkthrough stage and otherwise returns “false”.
1-Phase Task – In this variant, the agent takes actions
within the walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages simultaneously
in lock step. That is, if the agent takes a M OVE AHEAD
action, the agent moves ahead in both stages simultane-
ously; as the agent begins in the same starting position in
both stages, the agent’s position will always be the same
in both stages. As only navigational actions are allowed
during walkthrough, all actions of type APickup [ AOpen [
{PLACE OBJECT } are not executed by the agent in the walk-
through stage. During the unshufﬂe stage, the agent has ac-
cess to the RGB, W ALKTHROUGH RGB, and A GENT POSI -
TION sensors to complete its task.
2-Phase Task – In this task, the agent must complete both
the walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages sequentially. In this
5927

For IL trained models, prob. of takinŐĞǆƉĞƌƚĂĐƟŽŶis nŽŶͲǌĞƌŽĨŽƌĮƌƐƚϭͲϱŵŝůůŝŽŶƐƚĞƉƐ͖ƌĞƐƵůƚƐŝŶƚŚŝƐƉĞƌŝŽĚĂƌĞŶ͛ƚƐŚŽǁŶĂƐƚŚĞǇŝŶĐůƵĚĞĞǆƉĞƌƚĂĐƟŽŶƐ͘ 
Figure 5: Performance over training. The (training-set) performance of our models over ⇠75Mn training steps. We
report the #C HANGED and %F IXED STRICT metrics, shown values and 95% error bars are generated using locally weighted
scatterplot smoothing. Notice that the PPO models quickly saturate suggesting that they become stuck in local optima. IL
continue to improve throughout training although Tab. 1 suggests that these models begin to overﬁt on the training scenes.
100·SUCCESS " 100 ·%F IXED STRICT " %E # #C HANGED l
Experiment Train V al. Test Train V al. Test Train V al. Test Train V al. Test
1-Phase (Simple, IL) 2.2 1.3 1.8 7.3 4.7 4.8 1.17 1.10 1.08 1.1 0.7 0.6
1-Phase (Simple, PPO) 1.8 2.1 0.7 6.7 6.7 4.6 0.95 0.96 0.99 0.3 0.4 0.4
1-Phase (RN18, IL) 8.2 1.7 2.8 17.9 5.0 6.3 0.93 1.14 1.11 1.3 0.9 0.9
1-Phase (RN18, PPO) 1.4 1.5 1.1 6.6 6.0 5.3 0.94 0.96 0.98 0.3 0.3 0.3
1-Phase (RN18+ANM, IL) 4.8 5.2 3.2 12.8 11.1 8.9 1.05 1.05 1.04 1.3 1.0 1.0
2-Phase (RN18, PPO+IL) 1.6 0.5 0.2 4.2 1.2 0.7 1.10 1.15 1.12 0.6 0.4 0.4
2-Phase (RN18+ANM, PPO+IL) 2.3 0.6 0.3 7.3 1.6 1.4 1.09 1.15 1.10 0.9 0.5 0.4
Heur. Expert 85.1 88.0 83.4 91.2 93.1 91.2 0.09 0.07 0.09 2.2 2.2 2.3
Table 1: Results. For each experiment, (i) we evaluate model checkpoints, saved after approximately 0, 5, . . . , 75 million
steps, on the validation set, (ii) choose the best performing (lowest avg. %F IXED STRICT ) checkpoint among these, and (iii)
evaluate this best validation checkpoint on the other dataset splits. " and # denote if larger or smaller metric values are to be
preferred, l denotes a metric that is meant to highlight behavior rather than a measure quality.
task has access to the RGB, A GENT POSITION , and I N-
WALKTHROUGH sensors.
6.3. Training Pipeline
As our experimental results show, we found training
models to complete the RoomR task using purely reward-
based reinforcement learning methods to be extremely chal-
lenging. The difﬁculty remains even when using dense,
shaped rewards. Thus, we have chosen to adopt a hybrid
training strategy where we use the DD-PPO [ 47, 40] algo-
rithm, a reward-based RL method, to train our agent when
it is within the walkthrough stage, and an imitation learning
(IL) approach, where we minimize a cross-entropy loss be-
tween the agent’s policy and expert actions, is used when in
the unshufﬂe stage. As it has been successfully employed in
training agents in other embodied tasks ( e.g.[ 20]), for our
IL training, we employ DAgger [ 37]. In DAgger, we begin
training by forcing our agent to always take an expert’s ac-
tion with probability 1 and anneal this probability to 0 over
the ﬁrst 1Mn for the 1-Phase task and 5Mn steps for the
2-Phase task. Tacitly assumed in the above is that we have
access to an expert policy which can be efﬁciently evalu-
ated at every state reached by our agent. Even with access
to the full environment state, hand-designing an optimal,
efﬁciently computable, expert is extremely difﬁcult: sim-
ple considerations show that planning the agent’s route is at
least as difﬁcult as the traveling salesman problem. There-
fore, we do not attempt to design an optimal expert and,
instead, a greedy heuristic expert with some backtracking
and error detection capabilities. See Appendix B for more
details. This expert is not perfect but, as seen in Tab. 1, can
restore all but a small fraction of objects to their rightful
places. For additional training details, see Appendix A.
6.4. Results
Recall from Sec. 4 that our dataset contains a training set
of size 4000 and validation/testing sets of 1000 instances
each. We report results on each of these splits but, for efﬁ-
ciency, include only the ﬁrst 15 rearrangement instances per
room in the training set (leaving 1200 instances).
Baselines. We evaluate the following baseline models:
• 1-Phase (RN18, IL) – An agent trained using pure imita-
tion learning in the 1-Phase task. Recall that 1-Phase task
models use a simpliﬁcation of the model from Sec. 5, see
our code for more details.
• 1-Phase (RN18, PPO) – As above but trained with PPO.
• 1-Phase (Simple, IL) – As 1-Phase (RN18, IL) but we re-
place the ResNet18 CNN backbone and attention module
5928

(a) Successful unshufﬂe of a knife and dish sponge.
(b) Unsuccessful unshufﬂe of a newspaper and laptop.
Figure 6: Qualitative results. Trajectories sampled from a
1-Phase model. The goal, predicted, and initial conﬁgura-
tions are green, pink, and blue, respectively.
with 3 CNN blocks, this CNN is commonly used in embod-
ied navigation baselines [ 38].
• 1-Phase (Simple, PPO) – As PointU (Simple, IL) but
trained with PPO rather than IL.
• 2-Phase (RN18, PPO+IL) – An agent trained in the 2-
Phase task using the model from Sec. 5. PPO and IL are
used in the walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages, respectively.
• 1-Phase (RN18+ANM, IL) – We pretrain a variant of the
“Active Neural SLAM” (ANM) [ 8] architecture to perform
semantic mapping within AI2-THOR using our set of 72
object categories. We then freeze this mapping network and
train our “1-Phase (RN18, IL)” model extended to allow for
comparing between the maps created in the unshufﬂe and
walkthrough stages. See Appendix D for more details.
• 2-Phase (RN18+ANM, PPO+IL) – Similarly as above
but with semantic mapping model integrated into “2-Phase
(RN18, PPO+IL)” baseline above.
Analysis. We record rolling metrics during training in
Fig. 5. After training, we evaluate our models on our three
dataset splits and record the average metric values in Tab. 1.
From the results, we see several clear trends.
Unshufﬂing objects is hard – Even when evaluated on the
seen training rearrangements in the easier 1-Phase task, the
success of our best model is only 8.2%.
• Reward-based RL struggles to train – Fig. 5 shows that
PPO-based models quickly appear to become trapped in lo-
cal optima. Tab. 1 shows that the PPO agents move rel-
atively few objects but, when they do move objects, they
generally place them correctly even in test scenes.
• Pretrained CNN backbones can improve performance –
We hypothesized that using a pretrained CNN backbone
would substantially improve generalization performance
given the relatively little object variety (compared with Im-
ageNet) in our dataset. We see compelling evidence of this
when comparing the performance of the “1-Phase (Simple,
IL)” and “1-Phase (RN18, IL)” baselines (S UCCESS and
%F IXED STRICT improvements across all splits). The re-
sults were more mixed for the PPO-trained baselines.
• The 2-Phase task is much more difﬁcult than the 1-Phase
task – Comparing the performance of the “2-Phase (RN18,
PPO+IL)” and “1-Phase (RN18, IL)” baselines, it is clear
that the 2-Phase task is much more difﬁcult than the 1-
Phase task. If the agent managed to explore exhaustively
during the walkthrough stage then the two tasks would be
effectively identical. This suggests that the observed gap is
primarily driven by learning dynamics and the walkthrough
agent’s failure to explore exhaustively. Note that, as we se-
lect the best val. set model, Tab. 1 may give the impression
that the 2-Phase baseline failed to train at all: this is not
the case as we can see, in Fig. 5, that the “2-Phase (RN18,
PPO+IL)” baseline trains to almost the same training-set
performance as the 1-Phase IL baselines.
• Semantic mapping appears to substantially improve per-
formance – Our preliminary results suggest that semantic
mapping can have a substantial impact on improving the
generalization performance of rearrangement models, note
that the “+ANM” baselines outperform their counterparts in
almost all metrics, especially so on the validation and test
sets. These results are preliminary as we have not carefully
balanced parameter counts to ensure fair comparisons.
See Fig. 6 for success and failure examples.
7. Discussion
Our proposed Room Rearrangement task poses a rich
set of challenges, including navigation, planning, and rea-
soning about object poses and states. To facilitate learning
for rearrangement, we propose the RoomR dataset that pro-
vides a challenging testbed in visually rich interactive en-
vironments. We show that modern deep RL methodologies
obtain (test-set) performance only marginally above chance.
Given the low performance of existing methods we suspect
that future high-performance models will require novel ar-
chitectures enabling comparative mapping (to record object
positions during the walkthrough stage and compare these
positions against those observed in the unshufﬂe stage), vi-
sual reasoning about object positions, and physics to be able
to manipulate objects to their goal locations. Moreover, we
require new reinforcement learning methodologies to allow
the walkthrough and unshufﬂe stages to be trained jointly
with minimum mutual interference. Given these challenges,
we hope the proposed task opens up new avenues of re-
search in the domain of Embodied AI.
5929

References
[1] Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot,
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta, Vladlen Koltun, Jana
Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva,
and Amir R. Zamir. On evaluation of embodied navigation
agents. arXiv, 2018. 1, 2
[2] Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark
Johnson, Niko S ¨underhauf, Ian D. Reid, Stephen Gould, and
Anton van den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: In-
terpreting visually-grounded navigation instructions in real
environments. In CVPR, 2018. 1, 2
[3] Dhruv Batra, Angel X. Chang, Sonia Chernova, Andrew J.
Davison, Jia Deng, Vladlen Koltun, Sergey Levine, Jitendra
Malik, Igor Mordatch, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva,
and Hao Su. Rearrangement: A challenge for embodied ai.
arXiv, 2020. 2
[4] Dhruv Batra, Aaron Gokaslan, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Olek-
sandr Maksymets, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, A.
Toshev, and Erik Wijmans. Objectnav revisited: On evalua-
tion of embodied agents navigating to objects. arXiv, 2020.
1, 2
[5] Ohad Ben-Shahar and Ehud Rivlin. Practical pushing plan-
ning for rearrangement tasks. ICRA, 1996. 2
[6] Lars Berscheid, Pascal Meißner, and Torsten Kr ¨oger. Self-
supervised learning for precise pick-and-place without ob-
ject model. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2020.
2
[7] Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Gandhi, Abhinav Gupta,
and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Object goal navigation using
goal-oriented semantic exploration. In NeurIPS, 2020. 2
[8] Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Gandhi, Saurabh Gupta,
Abhinav Gupta, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Learning to ex-
plore using active neural slam. In ICLR, 2020. 2, 8, 12
[9] Tao Chen, Saurabh Gupta, and Abhinav Gupta. Learning
exploration policies for navigation. In ICLR, 2019. 2
[10] Nikolaus Correll, Kostas E. Bekris, Dmitry Berenson, Oliver
Brock, Albert Causo, Kris Hauser, Kei Okada, Alberto Ro-
driguez, Joseph M. Romano, and Peter R. Wurman. Analy-
sis and observations from the ﬁrst amazon picking challenge.
IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering ,
2018. 2
[11] Akansel Cosgun, Tucker Hermans, Victor Emeli, and Mike
Stilman. Push planning for object placement on cluttered
table surfaces. In IROS, 2011. 2
[12] Neil T Dantam, Zachary K Kingston, Swarat Chaudhuri, and
Lydia E Kavraki. Incremental task and motion planning: A
constraint-based approach. In RSS, 2016. 2
[13] Abhishek Das, Samyak Datta, Georgia Gkioxari, Stefan Lee,
Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Embodied Question Answer-
ing. In CVPR, 2018. 2
[14] Matt Deitke, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Aniruddha
Kembhavi, Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Jordi Salvador,
Dustin Schwenk, Eli V anderBilt, Matthew Wallingford, Luca
Weihs, Mark Y atskar, and Ali Farhadi. RoboTHOR: An
Open Simulation-to-Real Embodied AI Platform. In CVPR,
2020. 5
[15] Mehmet Dogar and Siddhartha Srinivasa. A framework for
push-grasping in clutter. In RSS, 2011. 2
[16] Linxi Fan, Y uke Zhu, Jiren Zhu, Zihua Liu, Orien Zeng, An-
chit Gupta, Joan Creus-Costa, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-
Fei. Surreal: Open-source reinforcement learning framework
and robot manipulation benchmark. In CORL, 2018. 2
[17] Caelan Reed Garrett, Tomas Lozano-Perez, and Leslie Pack
Kaelbling. Ffrob: Leveraging symbolic planning for efﬁ-
cient task and motion planning. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 2018. 2
[18] Daniel Gordon, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad Raste-
gari, Joseph Redmon, Dieter Fox, and Ali Farhadi. IQA:
Visual question answering in interactive environments. In
CVPR, 2018. 2, 6
[19] Marcus Gualtieri, Andreas ten Pas, and Robert Platt. Pick
and place without geometric object models. In ICRA, 2018.
2
[20] Saurabh Gupta, V arun Tolani, James Davidson, Sergey
Levine, Rahul Sukthankar, and Jitendra Malik. Cognitive
mapping and planning for visual navigation. Int. J. Comput.
Vis., 128(5):1311–1330, 2020. 7
[21] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR,
2016. 5
[22] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory.
Neural Computation, 1997. 5
[23] Unnat Jain, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Ali Farhadi, Svetlana
Lazebnik, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Alexander G. Schwing.
A cordial sync: Going beyond marginal policies for multi-
agent embodied tasks. In ECCV, 2020. 2, 5, 6
[24] Unnat Jain, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Mohammad Rastegari,
Svetlana Lazebnik, Ali Farhadi, Alexander G. Schwing, and
Aniruddha Kembhavi. Two body problem: Collaborative vi-
sual task completion. In CVPR, 2019. 2, 6
[25] Leslie Pack Kaelbling and Tom ´as Lozano-P ´erez. Hierarchi-
cal task and motion planning in the now. In ICRA, 2011.
2
[26] Jennifer King, Joshua Haustein, Siddhartha Srinivasa, and
Tamim Asfour. Nonprehensile whole arm rearrangement
planning on physics manifolds. In ICRA, 2015. 2
[27] Jennifer E King, Marco Cognetti, and Siddhartha S Srini-
vasa. Rearrangement planning using object-centric and
robot-centric action spaces. In ICRA, 2016. 2
[28] D. Kingma and J. Ba. A method for stochastic optimization.
In CVPR, 2017. 11
[29] Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli V anderBilt,
Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel Gordon, Y uke Zhu, Ab-
hinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. AI2-THOR: An Interactive 3D
Environment for Visual AI. arXiv, 2017. 2, 3
[30] Athanasios Krontiris and Kostas E Bekris. Dealing with dif-
ﬁcult instances of object rearrangement. In RSS, 2015. 2
[31] A. Krontiris and K. E. Bekris. Efﬁciently solving general
rearrangement tasks: A fast extension primitive for an incre-
mental sampling-based planner. In ICRA, 2016. 2
[32] Athanasios Krontiris, Rahul Shome, Andrew Dobson, An-
drew Kimmel, and Kostas Bekris. Rearranging similar ob-
jects with a manipulator using pebble graphs. In IEEE-RAS
International Conference on Humanoid Robots , 2014. 2
5930

[33] Y ann Labb ´e, Sergey Zagoruyko, Igor Kalevatykh, Ivan
Laptev, Justin Carpentier, Mathieu Aubry, and Josef Sivic.
Monte-carlo tree search for efﬁcient visually guided rear-
rangement planning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
2020. 2
[34] V olodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza,
Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver,
and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep
reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2016. 5
[35] Erion Plaku and Gregory D Hager. Sampling-based motion
and symbolic action planning with geometric and differential
constraints. In ICRA, 2010. 2
[36] Santhosh K. Ramakrishnan, Ziad Al-Halah, and Kristen
Grauman. Occupancy anticipation for efﬁcient exploration
and navigation. In ECCV, 2020. 2
[37] St ´ephane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A re-
duction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-
regret online learning. In AISTATS, 2011. 2, 7
[38] Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets,
Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain, Julian Straub, Jia
Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv
Batra. Habitat: A platform for embodied ai research. In
ICCV, 2019. 2, 5, 8
[39] Jonathan Scholz and Mike Stilman. Combining motion plan-
ning and optimization for ﬂexible robot manipulation. In
IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots ,
2010. 2
[40] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Rad-
ford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algo-
rithms. arXiv, 2017. 2, 7, 11
[41] Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Y onatan
Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Luke Zettlemoyer,
and Dieter Fox. ALFRED: A Benchmark for Interpreting
Grounded Instructions for Everyday Tasks. In CVPR, 2020.
1, 2, 6
[42] Haoran Song, Joshua A Haustein, Weihao Y uan, Kaiyu
Hang, Michael Y u Wang, Danica Kragic, and Johannes A
Stork. Multi-object rearrangement with monte carlo tree
search: A case study on planar nonprehensile sorting. In
IROS, 2020. 2
[43] Siddharth Srivastava, Eugene Fang, Lorenzo Riano, Ro-
han Chitnis, Stuart Russell, and Pieter Abbeel. Combined
task and motion planning through an extensible planner-
independent interface layer. In ICRA, 2014. 2
[44] Mike Stilman, Jan-Ullrich Schamburek, James Kuffner, and
Tamim Asfour. Manipulation planning among movable ob-
stacles. In ICRA, 2007. 2
[45] Luca Weihs, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Kiana Ehsani, Sarah M.
Pratt, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Eric Kolve, Dustin
Schwenk, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Ali Farhadi. Learning
generalizable visual representations via interactive game-
play. In ICLR, 2021. 5, 6
[46] Luca Weihs, Jordi Salvador, Klemen Kotar, Unnat Jain, Kuo-
Hao Zeng, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi.
Allenact: A framework for embodied ai research. arXiv,
2020. 11
[47] Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari S. Morcos, Stefan Lee,
Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra.
Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5
billion frames. In ICLR, 2020. 2, 5, 7
[48] Mitchell Wortsman, Kiana Ehsani, Mohammad Rastegari,
Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Learning to learn how to
learn: Self-adaptive visual navigation using meta-learning.
In CVPR, 2019. 2
[49] Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto Mart ´ın-Mart´ın, Or Litany,
Alexander Toshev, and Silvio Savarese. Relmogen: Leverag-
ing motion generation in reinforcement learning for mobile
manipulation. arXiv, 2020. 1
[50] Fanbo Xiang, Y uzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao
Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao Jiang, Yifu Y uan,
He Wang, Li Yi, Angel X. Chang, Leonidas J. Guibas, and
Hao Su. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environ-
ment. In CVPR, 2020. 1
[51] Wei Y ang, Xiaolong Wang, Ali Farhadi, Abhinav Gupta, and
Roozbeh Mottaghi. Visual semantic navigation using scene
priors. In ICLR, 2019. 2
[52] Tianhe Y u, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian,
Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-
world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta
reinforcement learning. In CoRL, 2020. 2
[53] Weihao Y uan, Johannes A Stork, Danica Kragic, Michael Y
Wang, and Kaiyu Hang. Rearrangement with nonprehensile
manipulation using deep reinforcement learning. In ICRA,
2018. 2
[54] Kevin Zakka, Andy Zeng, Johnny Lee, and Shuran Song.
Form2ﬁt: Learning shape priors for generalizable assembly
from disassembly. In ICRA, 2020. 2
[55] Y uke Zhu, Daniel Gordon, Eric Kolve, Dieter Fox, Li Fei-
Fei, Abhinav Gupta, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Ali Farhadi. Vi-
sual semantic planning using deep successor representations.
In ICCV, 2017. 2
5931
